What the hell. Sorry, I mean: hello, and welcome to The Spike’s 2017 review of the year in neuroscience. Thank any-passing-deity-that-happens-to-be-listening I don’t have to write a review of the year in politics. The combined malevolent incompetence of the US President and UK government will likely exhaust all possible permutations of terms of abuse by June 2018; after that their increasingly demented decisions and pronouncements will pass without response because we’ll have used All The Words. Every single one. Even the French ones. Va te faire foutre Trump, for example.

Brains. That’s what we’re here for. Like zombies, but with an education. There’s been a lot of sound and fury in neuroscience this year. Highbrow publications like Quanta and MIT Technology Review have burst with neuroscience stories. Neuron published so many opinion articles that they had to dedicate an entire bloody issue to them. If there’s any sign that a field of science has reached peak hot air, its that one of its elite journals publishes an issue without science. And Neuron published two in the space of 12 months (I’m aware of the irony of complaining about opinion pieces on a blog, thank you). Sound and fury; and many strong contenders for the Nobel Prize in Stating the Bleedin’ Obvious.

But what did you miss amongst the malestrom? Here for your delectation are four dispatches that arrived in 2017 from the more esoteric reaches of neuroscience. The type of neuroscience that could turn out to be epochal; or just plain old interesting. And what more can one ask?

(1) Sleep little worm, don’t you cry; Manuel’s going to sing you a lullaby

Sleep is a many splendored thing. It revitalises us, and cleans our brains. It seems essential for learning, and for creativity. We’d all like more of it. Without it, we die. Mammals need sleep so badly that, deprived of their slumber, bits of their brain will go to sleep independently of the rest while the animal is doing stuff. With awkward consequences. Horribly jet-lagged attendees at international conferences will recognise this as the bit during the poster session where you pitch head-first into the poster board while apparently still talking, because bits of your motor cortex have gone “god this is dull, I’m going to sleep”.

So we’d all like to know more about how the brain goes to sleep. But brains are big unwieldy beasts?—?how can we study how a whole brain goes to sleep? Manuel Zimmer and his team hit on a solution: study sleep in the tiny worm C Elegans. Yes, apparently worms with 302 neurons in their entire bodies fall asleep. Technically, it enters a state of lethargus: the worm goes offline, but there’s little evidence that it dreams (other than that mortifying recurring nightmare of being caught eating bacteria with its mouth open).

Zimmer and team showed us the neural activity cycling around the entire brain while the worm turns (and wriggles), then abruptly halting as the worm slept. As many as 75 percent of its neurons shut up entirely; and the rest carried on being active, but in a way that was unrelated to their activity in waking. In other words, they entered a different global state?—?one that looked very much like a random walk around a fixed point (if you’re excited about such things. Which I am. But then I code dynamical systems models for fun. So, you know, don’t take my word for it). What we gained here is view of sleep not as a thing created by some detailed, discrete sleep “circuit”, but as a switch in the state of the entire brain’s dynamics.

But this paper was also notable for the depths of its content. We often lament that papers in the most elite journals of science, the Natures and Sciences, are all mouth and no trousers: they report amazing results on the flimsiest of evidence. But this paper, in Science, spent the first few pages on a deep and detailed characterisation of how subtly different lineages of C Elegans (all the same species, remember) had different abilities to fall into the lethargic state, and how that changed over their development. It was like a firehose of deep science: no big picture, nothing flashy, but deep careful work to find the precise type of worm most suited to the question of what happens when worms sleep. In Science. Crazy shit. Is there hope yet?

(2) Would you like to hear voices?

Auditory hallucinations. One would think that these were a trifle tricky to objectively research, seeing as they practically define the personal subjective experience. (Pretentious, moi?) Yet as hallucinations are a debilitating hallmark of schizophrenia and other cognitive disorders, knowing something of how the brain creates them would be rather useful. This year Phil Corlett and co hit on a neat idea: why not create auditory hallucinations both in healthy people and in people who spontaneously suffer from them? For if we then measure the difference in how easy it is to create hallucinations in the two groups, we might learn something about how the brains of hallucinators are operating differently.

For it turns out we can make ordinary people have auditory hallucinations. Nothing scary, just hearing something that isn’t there. It’s disarmingly simple: pair the flash of a light with a short sound that you can just about hear. Do that a lot. Then just flash the light on its own. Even ordinary people then report hearing the tone a good percentage of the time. So the crux of this new study was: let’s also do that in people who already hear auditory hallucinations and ask if they hear more hallucinated tones? And if so, why?

The answer was: yes, yes they do. A lot more. And for much quieter sounds too. But the key insight here was that the authors used this data to make a model of “why”. And the answer was, predictably?—?prediction. Those pairings of light-and-sound set the brain up to make predictions. It predicts that the light means a sound is also present. So when the light flash comes alone, the brain goes right ahead and predicts a sound when none is present. In ordinary people, sometimes this prediction wins out against the sensory evidence that there was no sound, and a sound is heard where none is to be found. But in hallucinators this prediction dominated, so they heard many more fictional sounds.

Which all fits with an interesting theory of hallucinations, that they occur when the the brain starts adding too much credence to the predictions it makes, rather than using the information coming from the outside world. Like football pundits. Basically, the what-the-hell-is-Alan-Shearer-talking-about-now-did-he-even-watch-that-match theory of hallucinations.